---
layout: post
title: "Croatia is for Loitering"
date: 2016-03-06
categories: blog
---

*This short story was written during some recent travels within the 
beautiful countries of Croatia, Bosnia-Herzegovina, and Montenegro.*

I am in the moment, I am in Dubrovnik. The old harbor, of the old city, 
which withstood the Ottoman Empire, the Venetians, the Hungarians, the 
Normans, and all but Napolean. "But very few withstood Napolean," I think
to myself. I aimlessly meander to a cafe table by the harbor and sit. 
Less than an hour earlier my idyllic perch outside the city walls, 
among the waves and mollusks, was disturbed by a group of three large families, 
each wielding screaming children and bright pink 'selfie-sticks'. How did
they find me? Perhaps they are interested in mollusks. I am unsure.

{% include image.html img="images/dubrovnik_port.JPG" title="Dubrovnik Port" 
    width="75vw" caption="Dubrovnik Port"%}

So I sit and order a small pivo. Much to my chagrin, I have stumbled upon
a macabre entertainment, to which I have a front row seat. The comedic 
ballet of which I speak involves two competing Croatian saleswomen peddling 
glass-bottom boat rides to the invading hordes of cruise ship tourists.
"Panorama tour, around old city, take a brochure," exclaims the brunette 
while playfully flipping her hair. The blonde takes a more subtle approach, 
simply extending her pamphlets outward. She shivers at an apparent, but
unbeknownst to me, cold breeze. "This could get interesting," I mutter 
under my breath and then flag down my waiter to request some fried squid
and another beer. I will loiter a bit longer.

A large group of Asian tourists, with matching orange hats, demand to 
know which boat is better, since each costs 10 Euro. Both blonde and 
brunette excitedly exclaim the virtues of the vessels they represent. 
The blonde wins this particular contest, once she explains that her 
boat departs in 5 minutes. This in stark contrast to the brunette's 
astonishingly distant 20 minute embarkation time. I finally peer at my
watch for the first time since I was evicted from the seafront. 
It is 4:50 pm as the group of orange hatted people board the shivering 
blonde's boat. But the sun is high and bright in Dubrovnik. 
The squid has since arrived, and is very fresh, however, 
I eat uncharacteristically slow...something is missing. 

The show continues. The cast of waddling cruise ship patrons, wearing 
badges and stick-on numbers flows past my new perch. Have I really
been here an hour? And yet so little progress made on my squid. Risking
embarrassment and offending the chef, I flag my waiter and request some
hot sauce. "Oh yes, Tabasco sauce, is very good," replies my waiter with
thumbs up. I return him the thumb, relieved at how smooth the request 
went down. I am admiring the outline of the fort Revelin and its 
impregnability when the Tabasco arrives. I sauce my squid, and it is now
divine. A brief breeze causes a major shiver and tightening of the 
sweater by the blonde, who has all but abandoned pitching her 
brochures.

The brunette soldiers on, now targeting a group of elderly ladies who appear 
cold and tired. She informs that her boat can gracefully return them to ship, 
while in the process granting them views of Lokum island, the old walls, and 
if lucky perhaps dolphins. The seem interested in the respite, but some 
mysterious force pulls them away at the last second. The flow of the herd 
perhaps, the magnetic instinctual movement of the group towards some common
goal. A goal sought together, in comfort, and presumably attained via hand-held 
listening devices and bright colored objects atop sticks. I truly hope they 
find it, although I can't help but wonder why the speed limit must be set so 
high. Like a bullet train they pass over the old port, hurriedly pressing on, 
frantic and determined. Hundreds perhaps thousands pass by me as I sit, and 
many I notice again upon their quick return. Maybe, just maybe, at such a 
pace, their shared goal becomes blurred or even unseen. And so I conclude 
that they all should pay 10 Euro to either the blonde or brunette 
(I doubt it matters which), for surely the boat has a slower speed. A speed
necessary to resolve detail, to permit the mind to wonder, and to absorb. 

Much time has passed, my squid is long gone, and my waiter kindly informs me 
that I need to pay because his shift is over. I promptly oblige, and then he 
strongly advises that I stay while the sun dips over the walls. He correctly 
assumes I would appreciate such a detail, besides the event will be very soon
indeed. He says all of this with a telling wink and an unrestrained smile. 
He understands. In a small way, we understand each other. Only after I observe 
the gentleman disappear through the walled gate with his day-pack, do I stand 
to leave. I walk away while the sun still burns on my neck, and that seems 
best. As I unavoidably maneuver closely past the blonde, she does not bother 
informing me of the panoramic boat ride. Our eyes catch and she smirks, the 
first smile I have seen from her. She understands. In a small way, we 
understand each other. 
