---
layout: post
title: Solar system distance scaled to the Earth
date: 2016-02-20
categories: blog
---

Travel makes the world smaller and more accessible. But some 
destinations still feel remote and far. Just try the grueling 
19 hour direct flight from Newark to Singapore. But
distances between planets in our solar system, itself a tiny speck in the 
vast emptiness of space, are so immense they challenge comprehension 
and natural intuition. We humans are products of our biology, 
and therefore it  is often helpful to scale things down to 
our own physical size.

This is an attempt to create a small link between two great 
passions of exploration. That of exploring our local cosmos, and 
exploring the (more-local) cities of our world. I have therefore 
plotted the average planetary distances from the Sun, as great 
circle distances between cities on Earth. Distances are scaled 
such that 26,800 km (16,700 mi) is shown as 1 km. At this scale 
the distance from Los Angeles to New York City is around that of 
a city bus.

I have selected Paris as my Sun, the center of my scaled system. 
Paris is my wife's favorite city, perhaps its most famous monarch 
was dubbed the sun king,  and it is undeniably a 
bright, beautiful, and beloved locale. Paris seems right, and 
is certainly better than Birmingham or Des Moines. There may be some 
folks out there who would argue loudly for London or NYC.
To such people I reply, "a city of love" easily trumps 
"the big smoke" or "the big apple". 
With that settled, I plot the planets as cities some range from 
Paris. The distances are rough but when scaled up, are somewhere 
between the closest (periapsis) and furthest distance (apoapsis) 
of that planet from Sun. This margin-of-error permits me to select 
more interesting cities (and avoiding ones like Leeds). 

{% include image.html img="images/euro_map.jpg" title="Inner-planets scaled to world city distances" 
    height="40vh" caption="Map of inner planets" %}

All inner planets fit nicely in Europe, in fact compared to the full 
solar system they are practically on top of one another. We must 
zoom in near France, to appreciate the comparative distances.
I have placed the first planet, Mercury, at Caen, France.
A wonderful town in Normandy famous for its WW2 history and 
surviving cathedral. We are a mere 216 km from our origin.
Next we find Venus at Cologne, Germany. I have not been to Cologne 
but it also has a magnificent cathedral. Sadly, its town center 
was obliterated in WW2. Prior to this it was known as having 
one of the most well-preserved medieval centers in all of Europe. 
Our home, Earth, can be found at Turin, Italy. At the foot of the Alps, 
majestic and awe-inspiring, we are now 558 km from Paris. 
The last of the rocky-planets, Mars, is located in 
Belfast, UK. We are still not terribly far from Paris, just 851 km. 
Less than a 2-hour flight.

{% include image.html img="images/world_map.jpg" title="Outer-planets scaled to world city distances" 
    width="120vw" caption="Map of outer planets" %}

The outer planets open our eyes to the greater globe, and the distances 
from Paris increase by more than an order of magnitude. First comes 
Jupiter, mapped to Beirut, Lebanon. In parallel, the planets and cities 
are becoming more exotic. The inner planets are akin to neighbor 
countries (in Europe) or states in the US. They are very similar overall, 
rocky and small in the case of planets, linguistically or culturally 
in the case of the respective cities. In contrast, the outer 
planets bring true culture shock! They are massive, entertain complex 
ring and satellite systems, and lack a solid surface. 
The next giant is Saturn, to whom I have assigned Montreal, Canada. 
This is the only planet in the new world of the Americas. 
For the first time, we have traversed one of Earth's major oceans. 
A journey this far alluded western people for millennia. 
Next is Uranus, located in Singapore. This global city in southeast 
Asia, is very far from Paris in many ways. Finally, we reach Neptune, 
at the far-flung destination of Melbourne, AU. Flying here from Paris 
would take well over 21 hours.
