---
layout: post
title: "How does NASA benefit the average American?"
date: 2016-03-15
categories: blog
---

First, note that NASA's budget has
been less than 1% of the total federal budget (for 2016 it is 0.6%). Numerous
studies have shown that the return on investment from space exploration is
practically unmatched, publicly or privately.

{% include image.html img="images/nasa_budget.png" title="NASA percent budget" 
    width="70vw" caption="NASA percent budget"%}

It is important to point out
that NASA does lots of things! Space and advanced research areas force our
brightest minds to solve incredibly difficult problems, where unique
constraints and extreme environments necessitate creativity and innovation,
to an extent not encountered elsewhere. NASA's pursuits are
symbiotic, needing one another to thrive. You simply would not have
things like GPS and weather satellites, without efforts in planetary
exploration, manned space flight, and ballistic missile and aeronautics
research. __Some direct benefits__:

1. Spinoff technology. The mouse you possibly used to click here, the tiny
   camera in your mobile phone (thanks to JPL robotic rovers), and modern
   Firefighting suits all have origins in the space program. And bar coding,
   metallic foil, GPS, satellite TV, smoke detectors, Teflon, and numerous
   advanced medical equipment (including MRI). Aerodynamic semi-trucks,
   modern 'jaws-of-life', and the cochlear hearing implant. The list for 2016
   alone, is far too long for this post.
   See [NASA spinoff technology][], also some highlighted [tech in photos][].

2. It keeps you safe. Our military superiority is directly
   correlated with our efforts in exploration. And more so every day.
   If you fear an intercontinental ballistic missile or want troops in the
   Middle East to have superior reconnaissance, then you certainly want
   an advanced space program.

3. It informs your life. Weather forecasting, disaster relief, international
   communications. NASA satellites keep an eye on Hurricanes and wildfires.

4. It motivates the next generation of scientists, engineers, doctors,
   technologists, and inventors. Most STEM field professionals I know,
   list space exploration as a primary source of inspiration. For prosperity
   in the modern world, we need the best of these types. Creating a
   self-cleaning home toilet does not excite us nerds like space does...but if
   such a thing was to come about, it would probably have NASA origins.

All this stuff is great, but why we __really__ explore is the same as why we
write poetry and music, why we ponder the nature of matter, and ask questions
of philosophy. It is the very best expression of what makes us human. We
seek to understand our Universe, and thereby understand ourselves.

Many have asked, and still do ask, why do fundamental scientific research?
Where nothing tangible may arise (and often does not). They ask, perhaps
our limited resources are best spent elsewhere. Here is one small example
of why the answer is emphatically __NO__.
Fundamental research of matter led to quantum theory, which led to
the possibility of transistor circuits in silicon, which led to the computer
revolution, and eventually to the Internet revolution. None of this was
conceived of by those early ponderers who blazed the trail.
If not for our humanity, it is important for us to explore the final
frontier of space, because doing so pushes us forward into the
infinite unknown possibilities of our future.

*My friend and colleague Try Lam also has a nice blog post on this topic 
<a href="http://www.trylam.com/2015/09/why-explore-space/">here</a>*

[NASA spinoff technology]: http://spinoff.nasa.gov
[tech in photos]: http://www.nasa.gov/offices/oct/40-years-of-nasa-spinoff
