---
layout: post
title: The curious public enthusiasm towards SpaceX 
date: 2016-02-28
categories: blog
---
As a space enthusiast and NASA engineer, I am thrilled by 
the progress of SpaceX and other non-traditional private space companies.
Their achievements in reducing cost to LEO are important and invaluable. 
I hope the growing success of private space will permit NASA to dedicate its
resources (and personnel) to more distant and exciting destinations, where 
true exploration beckons us. Having said that, much of what I perceive as the 
public's understanding of these companies and their role is disheartening. 
For example, I have noticed a broad consensus, among a significant block of 
the voting public, that these entities represent a nail-in-the-coffin for 
a dying NASA. Some see SpaceX as proof positive of the superiority of 
private corporations over big government agencies. This view could not be 
more divorced from reality, and in this article I hope to illuminate a few things.

First, SpaceX is hardly a free-market private enterprise, the way certain 
libertarian-leaning observers (and most of the media) portray it to be. 
It is overwhelmingly a NASA supplier and sub-contractor. 
$4.2 billion of its $10 billion valuation (in 2015) consists of NASA 
contracts.[^1]
However, this is not a bad thing, and certainly not new. Private companies 
have been instrumental in building and contributing to NASA spacecraft 
from the very beginning. Martin-Marietta built the Apollo LEM, and traditional 
aerospace giants Boeing and Lockheed-Martin have had a role in just
about every modern space mission. The latter built the Atlas booster, 
which has had over 100 consecutive launches without a single failure.[^2] 
Although these companies garner contracts from a variety of sources, their 
space sectors ultimately derive funds from the taxpaying public.

Sure, we are slowly developing true free-market business in space. Examples 
include communication and weather satellites, geolocating, and remote sensing. 
In the not so distant future we may add asteroid mining, power generation, and 
tourism. But such activities are starkly different than science-driven 
exploration. This fundamental endeavor will continue to be the role of 
government (of the people), simply because there is no sensible 'for-profit' 
model in space exploration; nor basic scientific research in general. 
Our true exploratory ventures in space continue to be, primarily, publicly funded. 
And it is this activity which makes any business possible, 
including the very existence of SpaceX and Blue Origin. 
Generally, true space exploration concedes a terrible business model. One which 
is fraught with high-risk, and little short-term monetary gain. 
Unfortunately, Elon Musk and Jeff Bezos sometimes contradict this reality. 
Recently, Bezos stated his belief that "ultimately, all of 
our space endeavors should be profitable."[^3] I cringe when reading such 
statements. 

But alas, we do not explore for monetary gain, or any other capitalistic 
motivation. We explore because we are human, for many of the same 
reasons we write poetry and ponder the possible existence of parallel
universes. SpaceX and other companies are playing an important and exciting 
role, but let's keep things in perspective. None is usurping NASA, nor out 
performing. The American space program continues to thrive, and is undoubtedly 
the greatest such program on Earth. 

[^1]: http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-03-04/spacex-profitable-as-musk-pulls-in-nasa-contracts-google-cash 
[^2]: http://spaceflightnow.com/2015/10/02/recap-story-100-succeses-and-counting-for-united-launch-alliance/
[^3]: http://arstechnica.com/science/2016/03/behind-the-curtain-ars-goes-inside-blue-origins-secretive-rocket-factory/
