---
layout: post
title: Parker Solar Probe - Seven Awesome Facts
date: 2018-07-05
categories: blog
---

Parker Solar Probe (PSP) is a NASA mission which will soon embark on a daring dive 
towards our Sun, far closer to the inferno than any previous man-made object.
PSP is slated to launch on August 4th, and I have the honor of being the Orbit Determination 
lead for this historic mission.
[Check out the official Parker Solar Probe website.](http://parkersolarprobe.jhuapl.edu/)


On the eve of launch, it seems fitting to share my personal list of seven awesome solar probe facts.
Why seven? Read fact #7 to find out...

{% include image.html img="images/psp_artist.png" 
    title="Parker Solar Probe" height="40vh" 
    caption="Artist's impression of NASA's Parker Solar Probe. 
    Credit: Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory."
%}

#### Fact 1:

The solar probe spacecraft will be traveling around 190 km/s (425,017 mph) during 
closest approach to the Sun (beginning in late 2024). At this speed it would take you a 
mere 10-seconds to travel from New York City to Kansas City!

#### Fact 2:

Speaking of close approaches to the Sun (what we astrodynamicists call perihelia)...
PSP gets very close to our star, 22x closer than Earth, and almost 7x closer than Mercury.
The diameter of the Sun as seen by the spacecraft will be more than 10x larger than what 
we see on Earth. You would need at least 10 thumbs to cover that radiating ball of gas!

#### Fact 3:

Thankfully PSP has a large thermal protection system (TPS) to protect it from
the hellish heat. Cutting-edge technology was involved in the construction of the TPS, which 
is effectively a heat shield that the sensitive spacecraft components and instruments 
hide behind. The front of the TPS will experience temperatures upwards of 2000&#176; Celsius
while maintaining components below about 100&#176; Celsius. 

{% include image.html img="images/psp_sc_view.png" 
    title="Parker Solar Probe Spacecraft Components" 
    height="40vh" caption="Parker Solar Probe Spacecraft Components.
    Credit: Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory."
    %}

#### Fact 4:

Why is the Sun's corona (atmosphere) hotter than it's surface?
This question (not really a fact at all) happens to be one of 
the central scientific mysteries PSP aims to understand. The Sun's core is 
more than 15 million degrees Celsius, and it cools gradually as you move outward, 
reaching a relatively chill 6000&#176; at the visible surface. 
But then strangely the trend reverses and begins heating up. 
The corona can be 300x as hot as the surface. 
This is a total enigma and understanding it could help protect us 
from the increasing threat space weather poses to our technologically dependent society.

#### Fact 5:

PSP will be traveling so fast relative to the Sun that the strange effects of special and general 
relativity become apparent. From the reference frame of PSP, the Sun's dangerous radiation 
will appear from a direction which is more than 2.1 arcminutes away from the inertial location of 
the Sun itself. This effect is known as 
[aberration of light](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aberration_of_light) and must be accounted 
for. Most importantly when pointing the TPS so as to adequately protect the spacecraft. 
Not doing so would otherwise expose our sensitive instruments.

#### Fact 6:

It requires more energy to get this close to the Sun than it does to escape the entire 
solar system! This is very non-intuitive since the Sun is relatively close to Earth 
(30x closer than the planet Neptune). To escape the solar system from Earth you need to 
increase your speed by at least 12.4 km/s (27,738 mph). But to reach the 
minimum solar distance PSP will achieve requires a speed reduction of 21 km/s (46,975 mph).

#### Fact 7:

This revolutionary mission uses seven gravity assist flybys of Venus in order 
to 'touch the Sun'. Hence, there are seven facts on this list. 
Without the gravitational help from our closest neighbor planet, this mission 
would not be feasible. The flybys, which occur at various altitudes, 
represent the engine necessary to reduce the orbital energy and the distance 
to the Sun.

{% include image.html img="images/psp_trajectory.png" 
    title="Parker Solar Probe Trajectory" 
    height="30vh" caption="Parker Solar Probe Trajectory. 
    Credit: Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory."
%}

I hope these seven facts provide an enticing glimpse into this 
stellar project. Tune in starting August 4th for the historic launch.
For more information visit:

* [The official Parker Solar Probe website](http://parkersolarprobe.jhuapl.edu/)
* [NASA Goddard's Parker Solar Probe website](https://www.nasa.gov/content/goddard/parker-solar-probe/)
